So i finally got around to reading Frederick P. Brooks' <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Mythical-Man-Month-Software-Engineering-Anniversary/dp/0201835959/ref=pd_bbs_sr_1?ie=UTF8&amp;s=books&amp;qid=1203532526&amp;sr=8-1">The Mythical Man-Month</a>. Many people consider this book a timeless classic. I don't entirely agree with this though. It is a very good book, and a lot of the stuff in it is awfully familiar even though it's written 30 years ago. But because it's been written 30 years ago, there really are some parts that have become kinda dated. And I'm not even talking about the references to writing code. Those are actually interesting, from a more historical point of view. But I don't really agree on his views on the role and power of the architect of the system. In fact, his entire Surgical Team (as he calls it) does not look appealing to me at all... it kinda conflicts with the world of agile development that we know of today. Since this is the 20th anniversary edition, the book also contains a nice chapter where he looks back on the opinions that he asserted in the original version, and corrects a few of them. That chapter was also written 10 years ago though, so I'd actually love to hear how he feels about a couple of his stated opinions these days. Don't get the wrong idea though, i really enjoyed reading this book and most of the human and social aspects of software development that he talks about are very insightful and definitely still relevant if you're in the business of software development, regardless of if you're a manager or a developer or whatever. <a href="http://davybrion.com/blog/recommended-books/">Highly recommended</a>.