Since its inception, the ALT.NET community has grown a lot. A lot of people have joined the mailinglists and all over the world local ALT.NET communities have been created, with most likely a lot more on the way.  That is definitely a good thing.  At the same time though, the ALT.NET community has probably put off as many people (if not more) than it has attracted in the first place.

Now, just so everyone is clear on this: I consider myself a part of that community and I definitely want to see it become successful.  But for that to happen, I think we need to make some changes.  The biggest problem is that we are often perceived as being elitist, and according to some people closed-minded.  And honestly, there's a lot of truth to that.  Just read our mailinglists, our blog posts, our 'tweets' (i don't use twitter so I don't know if that's the correct way of referring to it but you know what I mean) and a lot of the material we put out there in general.  Not everyone in this community is guilty of it, but a lot of us (myself included) are.

In general, we are extremely opinionated and we often state our opinions with a "our way or the highway" kind of mentality.  We often outright dismiss approaches or solutions that do not follow our principles and values. And we usually do it in a manner which comes across in a very negative way.  And it's really not hard to see why that puts a lot of people off.  When someone simply tells me I need to do something in a certain way, my natural reflex is to question it. Why should I do it that way? If I don't get a sound response to that (and one-liners usually don't cut it), the person (or company or whatever) who made the claim immediately loses credibility in my book.  I can definitely see how some people have felt that way after hearing/reading certain ALT.NET people making their claims without properly backing them up or simply brushing off any questioning of those claims.

There is absolutely nothing wrong with being opinionated and voicing those opinions. But we really should try to do so in a more positive manner.  Simply stating that all developers should use certain practices or principles just doesn't work.  We have to formulate our messages better and we probably need to provide more material that properly explains why practice X or principle Y or library Z allows us to achieve better results.  And most importantly, we need to make sure we're able to discuss these things with anyone who's not yet 'into it' or even against it, without putting people off.  If a lot of people think that we're elitist, closed-minded, frustrated, annoying, or whatever (and they do, just google it) then we are clearly not doing a good job.  If we really want to spread these practices and principles that we value so much, we can't afford to rub so many people the wrong way.

As I mentioned in the beginning of my post, I've definitely made these mistakes on quite a few occasions.  And I'm gonna try to change that from now on. So if you see me repeat those mistakes, please direct me to this post :)