I frequently hear people complaining about lazy loading.  Not really about specific implementations of the lazy loading pattern, but about the pattern itself.  A lot of people think it shouldn't be used, or be possible at all, because it makes it too easy for developers to write code that will perform horribly slow when it has to deal with the volumes of data that can be expected in production environments.  I could not disagree more.  It is true that many developers make too much use of lazy loading in their code, which most definitely will cause performance problems sooner or later.  I don't however think this is an inherent problem with lazy loading, it's purely an example of lazy coding.  

If you need data, then it is your responsibility to retrieve that data as efficiently as you can.  If you know that your code is going to need a certain set of data to perform the functionality that it needs to provide, then you should retrieve that set of data in the best way possible.  Often, this means loading that set of data with as few queries as you can.  If you merely retrieve the first entity that you need, and then make use of the lazy loading features to automatically get the rest of the data without you having to write a specific query for it, then you probably shouldn't be writing software for a living.  If you're taking such a shortcut out of laziness, then you're probably the kind of developer who will take much more shortcuts in your code to 'finish' your task as quickly as possible.  Frankly, I'd rather not work with people like that. 

Most problems that are attributed to lazy loading are really manifestations of the laziness (or ignorance) of the developers who write code like that.  They are not inherently related to what lazy loading is about.  In many cases, lazy loading can indeed improve performance of your code, but as with so many concepts and practices, it all depends on the situation.  If a certain subset of the data that you would retrieve will not be used in the majority of cases, then obviously lazily loading that subset of data instead of eagerly fetching it could be a big performance improvement.  

Here are some rules of thumb that I usually employ when it comes to lazy loading:

- If a set of data is always, or at least in the (large) majority of cases, needed by your code then don't use lazy loading and fetch the required data as efficiently as you can
- If a set of data is not needed in the majority of cases, then use lazy loading instead of eager fetching
- If the probability of a set of data being needed is about 50%, decide on a case by case basis and keep the size of the set of data in mind, as well as the cost of fetching it separately over the cost of fetching everything together

And that is really all there is to it.  Keep those rules in mind, and you'll hardly ever run into problems with lazy loading. Don't say no to lazy loading, say no to lazy coding instead.