The subtitle of <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Practical-Guide-Successful-Software-Projects/dp/0974514047/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1252258619&sr=8-1">Ship It</a> is "A Practical Guide To Successful Software Projects", which it most certainly is.  While it doesn't cover nearly as much ground as <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Art-Agile-Development-James-Shore/dp/0596527675/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1252258668&sr=8-1">The Art Of Agile Development</a>, it does contain enough valuable information that will improve the way you attempt to deliver working software.

That is, unless you're already doing things like Continuous Integration, automated testing and code reviews.  While these topics certainly aren't the only practices that are discussed in the book, they are pretty much the practices 'building blocks' that this book depends on.  If you're already using these practices in your projects, then odds are that you won't really learn anything new from this book.  However, if you're not doing this, or your projects are just a mess and you really have problems delivering software, then this book will definitely help you to improve your situation.

The book first covers a couple of tools and the necessary infrastructure that you'll need to successfully develop software.  Things that some of us will take for granted (source control, CI server, change notification, issue tracker, etc...) but that not everyone is using (apparently).  After that, some solid practices are covered, such as the importance of having a technical lead and the responsibilities that come with this job, communication and coordination between all team members, and extensive code review practices (this part was especially good IMO).  

The book then also covers 'Tracer Bullet Development' which is an approach that the authors recommend for all projects.  It basically comes down to using a layered architecture that is loosely coupled and nicely encapsulated along with some good advice in general on how to get working functionality into your system quickly, yet sustainable.  Finally, the book closes with (usually) solid advice for a list of typical problems that many teams are suffering from.

Again, if you're already using the practices that I mentioned in this review then you most likely will not really benefit from this book, and you'd be better off reading the Art Of Agile Development instead to improve what you're already doing.   But if you're not using any of these practices yet, this book should help you improve your working environment very quickly and rather easily.