Being a .NET developer isn't easy.  Being a .NET developer who wants to get better all the time is even harder.  Where do we go for guidance? Where do we go to get that valuable knowledge that will help us improve our skills and help us serve our customers/employers better?

A lot of .NET developers expect this kind of guidance from Microsoft, particularly from groups like Patterns & Practices.  In the past, i honestly think they did a pretty lousy job at that.  In the last year however, i think we've seen some positive signs that things are improving, although rather slowly. 

There's also an ever increasing group of .NET developers who look to the ALT.NET community for guidance.  There are a lot of talented, motivated and passionate developers in this community and there certainly is a whole lot of valuable knowledge to be found there.  However, in the last couple of weeks especially, it seems like this community is ruled by the Holy Trinity Of Continuous Bitching.  Well, the mailing list especially.  At times it feels embarrassing to even be subscribed to it, although there still is the occasional nugget of interesting information to be found.  At least, if you don't mind going through all of the high-school drama to get to that valuable information.

So who should we, the regular nobodies who happen to develop software for a living look up to for advice and guidance?  Should we just listen to what Microsoft recommends? Hmm, no.  Should we blindly follow the supposed ALT.NET leaders? Please don't.  

Here's what i recommend: try to learn from the people who actually make sense to you.  It doesn't matter who they work for, what they have done in the past, what they are working on right now, or even how unknown they are.  If it makes sense, it makes sense.  If it helps you improve your current way of working, it's a step up already.  It really doesn't matter if what you're doing is 'right' according to the 'big shots'.  Do what works for you.  Do what helps you improve what you're doing.  Don't resort to blindly following anyone.