As some of you may have read, i commented <a href="http://davybrion.com/blog/2009/03/techdays-no-thanks/">recently</a> on why i wasn't interested in going to the <a href="http://www.microsoft.com/belux/techdays/about.aspx">TechDays</a> event.  <a href="http://blogs.msdn.com/tommer/">Tom Mertens</a>, the organizer of the event, <a href="http://davybrion.com/blog/2009/03/techdays-no-thanks/comment-page-1/#comment-10115">disagreed</a> with my "questionable content, bad marketing"-statement and wanted to know what kind of content would make me want to attend these events.

First of all, i want to see more love for the Open Source Software (OSS) world within the .NET community.  Like it or not, deny it if you want, but an ever increasing number of .NET developers are making use of OSS libraries/frameworks.  No matter what Microsoft's official stance on this matter is, they can't reasonably deny that this has a positive effect on the entire .NET platform.  So why is there so little attention to this portion of the .NET community?  I want sessions on NServiceBus, NHibernate, Castle Windsor, StructureMap, NInject, PostSharp, Castle Monorail, etc... There's no reason why competing Microsoft products (Entity Framework, Unity, ASP.NET MVC, Enterprise Library, ...) should get a lot of attention while other (and in some cases, more mature and powerful) alternative solutions to the same problem are largely ignored.  

Next up, the obsession with Drag-n-Drop Development (the <em>other</em> kind of DDD).  I don't care how easy some of these things can be... i care about how well these things scale.  To be more specific, i want to know how well these things scale in terms of performance, code complexity, and the number of developers in a team that perform similar tasks.  The typically glorified "Hello World" examples really don't cut it.  I want real world code. I want real world complexity and problems.  I want solutions that are <strong>viable</strong> in the real world, i don't care how well you can sell your Hello World solution.

I also want more focus on proper software development practices.  I want more focus on readable code, testable code, reducing complexity (<strong>in real world situations</strong>), improving maintainability, enabling scalability, basically anything that enables us to produce higher quality code.  When i ask people what their favorite sessions were, i almost always hear them mention sessions that deal with <strong>solving</strong> problems... either performance issues, or weird, hard to debug bugs.  Pinpointing problems and fixing them are extremely important skills, but shouldn't we all focus just a little bit more on <strong>avoiding problems in the first place?</strong>

That brings me to the speakers.  I don't want to offend anyone specifically, but i know for a fact that i wouldn't want some of those MVP's doing presentations to go anywhere near my code.  And that statement is not based on the work they've put out on their blogs or in presentations or anything in public.  It's based on what they did while they were doing their job at clients.  You know, real world stuff.  Give me sessions by <a href="http://ayende.com/Blog/">Ayende</a>, <a href="http://codebetter.com/blogs/gregyoung/">Greg Young</a>, <a href="http://haacked.com/">Phil Haack</a>, <a href="http://www.hanselman.com/blog/">Scott Hanselman</a> and others like them.  And yes, i know the people i listed are either MVP's or even Microsoft employees.  I don't care.  These people genuinely care about <strong>quality</strong> instead of just their own career.  That is what i want from speakers.  From every single one of them.

Basically, give me an ALT.NET track.  You don't even need to call it ALT.NET... that name is a double-edged sword so i wouldn't blame anyone for avoiding associations to it.  But give me that type of content, those type of speakers.  Even better, put all of that stuff in <strong>one</strong> day of the conference/event.  I'd be hesitant to go for 3 days to get a good session here or there, but if there's one day where i can spend the entire day going to the type of sessions and speakers i mentioned above, i'd be more than willing to pay out of my own pocket to go.   And of all of those 1650 attendees, and despite the 95% approval rating of those who bothered to submit evaluations, how many of them could honestly say that they'd be willing to pay for the event out of their own pocket?