I received an email from someone who wanted to let me know that she noticed that a coworker of her used all of the code from my <a href="http://davybrion.com/blog/2009/08/build-your-own-data-access-layer-series/">Build Your Own Data Access Layer Series</a> in their project without any notice of where it actually came from.  The code in that series was posted using the <a href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/">Creative Commons Attribution license</a> which only states one simple condition:

<blockquote>You must attribute the work in the manner specified by the author or licensor (but not in any way that suggests that they endorse you or your use of the work).</blockquote>

First of all, i don't really get what this person was trying to achieve by notifying me of this.  What am i going to do about it?  Ask them to add a notice?  Should i even care about it?  I don't, actually.  If anything, i'm glad they're using it and i just hope that it works for them and that they don't run into any issues with it.  If i didn't want people using it, i shouldn't have posted it.  And as for adding a notice... that would be nice, but it's not going to make any difference for me whether they do or don't.  

I think it's different when you release code as an open source project.  Then i obviously do want people to respect the license, but for blog code i don't really care what people do with it.  I did mention a license in the original post, but that's pretty much only because some people don't want to use it if there is no license mentioned.  Which is correct, theoretically.  But the vast majority of code that i list on this blog never has a mention of a specific license.  It's just too much of a bother IMO, and there isn't anything that i can realistically do about it if people use it without respecting the license anyway.

So for future reference: feel free to do whatever you want with any code that i post on this blog, unless of course that code comes from an open source project.  Would it be legal? No. Am i going to do something about it? No.