<p><a href="http://geekswithblogs.net/alternativedotnet/Default.aspx" target="_blank">Michel Grootjans</a> recently left the following comment on a <a href="/blog/2010/01/never-underestimate-your-own-stupidity" target="_blank">post</a> where I discussed a really stupid mistake I made:</p>  <blockquote>   <p>Been there, done that, but never had the courage to post it.</p> </blockquote>  <p>That got me thinking. What exactly is courageous about being honest about a mistake you made? I mean, everybody makes mistakes and nobody is an exception to that. Why do so many people try to hide this fact?</p>  <p>I used to work at a large financial institution where a lot of the people weren’t very honest about mistakes they made. When things went wrong, a lot of them came up with excuses or denied outright that they had made a mistake and blamed it one someone else or on some other event. That’s one of the worst things you can do if you ask me. For one, it reduces your credibility and people will be less likely to trust whatever it is you say once they realize that you’re not entirely honest about such things.</p>  <p>One of the biggest mistakes that I made there led to learning one of my most cherished lessons. I once accidentally truncated 4 large tables in a production database. It was very early in the morning and parts of my brain must’ve still been sleeping. I knew that the database operations guys were going to spend a lot of time on trying to fix things, and that it would be a very unpleasant situation for me. When I called them, I just told them outright that I had made a really stupid mistake and that I needed their help. It was pretty obvious that they weren’t used to someone actually telling them that and to my surprise, they were very cool about it. They restored the 4 tables rather quickly and the whole situation was resolved without too many problems. I told my superior about what had happened and that it was my own stupid fault that the application was down for a few hours. He too took that rather well. From that point on, I've made it a habit to just be entirely honest about every mistake or screw up that I'd make. </p>  <p>For one, why on earth should I worry about what people will think of me because I made a stupid mistake? Like I said, everyone makes mistakes and as long as you don’t make too many of them too frequently, there is nothing wrong with it. And anyone who will think differently of you because of it is really just a hypocrite. In fact, most people will respect you more if you are just honest and open about it.</p>  <p>As for writing posts about them… there are a few reasons why I do that. First of all, by writing about them you are more likely to remember the mistake and you’ll hopefully won’t make it again. Secondly, it’s typically an interesting opportunity for others to learn from as well. Last but not least, by posting honestly about them I can hopefully show people that there really isn’t anything wrong with being honest about it and who knows, maybe even encourage them to do the same in the future when it happens to them.</p>  <p>But is it courageous? I don’t think so… If a certain action doesn’t justify any fear, then there’s no reason to consider doing so courageous either.</p>  <p>Oh, and if you want to read up on more of my mistakes, check out the following posts:</p>  <ul>   <li><a title="/blog/2009/01/my-2-most-cherished-mistakes/" href="/blog/2009/01/my-2-most-cherished-mistakes/" target="_blank">My 2 most cherished mistakes</a></li>    <li><a title="/blog/2008/05/how-a-simple-foreach-statement-can-waste-an-afternoon/" href="/blog/2008/05/how-a-simple-foreach-statement-can-waste-an-afternoon/" target="_blank">How a simple foreach statement can waste an afternoon</a></li>    <li><a title="/blog/2008/10/do-not-dispose-in-the-prerender-event/" href="/blog/2008/10/do-not-dispose-in-the-prerender-event/" target="_blank">Do not dispose in the prerender event</a></li>    <li><a title="/blog/2008/12/the-importance-of-releasing-your-components-through-windsor/" href="/blog/2008/12/the-importance-of-releasing-your-components-through-windsor/" target="_blank">The importance of releasing your components through Windsor</a></li> </ul>  <p>Come to think of it, there should be plenty more of those… guess I gotta start posting about them more often :)</p>