<p>Uncle Bob has done it again.&#160; In <a href="http://blog.objectmentor.com/articles/2010/01/17/dependency-injection-inversion" target="_blank">his latest post</a>, he actually advises people to go back to manual dependency injection instead of relying on a framework (our beloved IOC containers) to do it for us.&#160; You really ought to check out the post and his examples in particular.&#160; Done with that? Ok.</p>  <p>There are two major problems that i have with his post.&#160; The first is this one:</p>  <blockquote>   <p>I like this because now all the Guice is in one well understood place. I don’t have Guice all over my application. Rather, I’ve got factories that contain the Guice. Guicey factories that keep the Guice from being smeared all through my application. </p>    <p>What’s more, if I wanted to replace Guice with some other DI framework, I know exactly what classes would need to change, and how to change them. So I’ve kept Guice uncoupled from my application.</p> </blockquote>  <p>For those of you who don’t know, Guice is an IOC container from Google.&#160; Uncle Bob doesn’t want references of an IOC container spread out throughout his application, but he doesn’t seem to mind coupling his factories with his IOC container for some reason.&#160; He seems to think that he can actually switch to a different container more easily because of this, because he would only have to modify his factories.</p>  <p>Here’s the deal.&#160; If you have more than a handful of references to your IOC container in your code (apart from the registration obviously), then you really don’t know what using an IOC container is all about.&#160; Yes, i know Uncle Bob is supposed to be a legend.&#160; Yes, i realize that i’m saying that a legend in the OO world doesn’t seem to grasp some of the most important concepts of using an IOC container.&#160; Can you really disagree with that after reading his post? </p>  <p>His whole idea of making it easier to switch to another container with his approach is ludicrous.&#160; He would have to modify every single factory that he uses, and in his trivial non-real world examples that wouldn’t be a lot to do but out here in the real world, we’d end up with a boatload of those factories and they would all have to be modified.&#160; Conversely, if you’re using an IOC container in the way it is meant to be used, you’d only have to change your registration code and the <em>one or two</em> places where you resolve something manually through the container.&#160; And that’s it.&#160; Yes, you typically only need one or two places where you use the container directly.&#160; Well, unless you’re Uncle Bob of course.</p>  <p>My other problem with his post is with the sample that he uses.&#160; It really is a very simplistic example and the approach he outlines simply does not scale when you’re dealing with large, real-world codebases.&#160; His approach might work for the size of the examples in his books, or for the code of <a href="http://fitnesse.org/" target="_blank">Fitnesse</a>, but if i were to apply his recommended approach for some of the systems that we’re working on, it would lead to a terrible mess very quickly.&#160; Not exactly what i’d have in mind when thinking of <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Clean-Code-Handbook-Software-Craftsmanship/dp/0132350882/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&amp;s=books&amp;qid=1263888825&amp;sr=8-1" target="_blank">Clean Code</a>.</p>  <p>The one thing i do like about this post? Well, there are quite a few people who follow Uncle Bob blindly and can’t say a single bad thing about his thoughts/ideas/approaches.&#160; I know quite a few of them make extensive use of IOC containers and some of them are even involved in the development of these containers.&#160; Hopefully, Uncle Bob’s post will finally convince these people that blindly following <em>anyone</em> is simply never a good idea and that you have to keep a critical mindset for everything that you read, no matter who wrote it.</p>