As you probably know, I'm currently learning Ruby.  And as you may or may not know, Ruby is a very dynamic language.  And one of the things that I found immensely interesting about it is the ability to add methods to existing classes or to existing objects, which isn't the same as adding a method to a class in Ruby btw.  And it sorta got me thinking about how the whole static vs dynamic thing can be applied to how we are often taught about objects and classes.

Chances are that when you learned about OO, you were introduced to the concept of objects using real world items.  For instance, a door could be an object.  It has certain attributes, and it has certain operations that can be invoked on it.  But once a door has been produced, it will never gain new capabilities.  It won't learn anything new.  If anything, the attributes and operations that it was created with will only deteriorate over time.  

Then again, some of us will undoubtedly have heard that a person is an example of an object too.  A Person is an instance of the Human class.  There is a huge difference between a Person instance and a Door instance.  While the Door will never change (except for possible deterioration), a Person will change during its lifetime.  It will gain new capabilities depending on what the Person instance goes through during its lifetime.  It will also lose capabilities.  It will gain new attributes, and some of them will no longer apply to that Person instance after a while.  Its relationships can vary wildly from each Person to the next.  A Person instance is highly dynamic throughout its lifetime, while a Door will always be the same.  

The weird thing is... a lot of us use OO to model or mimic real world behavior.  But real world behavior is pretty dynamic.  Not for everything, but it definitely is for some things.  And all this time, a large majority of us has been trying to model or mimic that behavior with static languages.  In a static language, a Person instance would never be able to grow.  You could define multiple types of Persons, but hey, a lot of people generally don't like to be put in groups based on attributes or capabilities and you'll always run into problems when doing so.  

I'm not trying to convince anyone about anything specific in this post. But I am trying to get you think about what I'm saying.  I do believe that objects can 'grow' in some or maybe even a lot of cases.  And I think a lot of us can agree that static languages aren't exactly a great solution to dealing with this problem (though I prefer the term 'reality' instead).  Dynamic languages on the other hand can offer better ways to deal with this, but then again you do have to keep in mind that they come with some downsides as well.  In software development, there are very, very few win-win situations.  Everything is a trade-off.  For everything that you know and love, there will be an alternative that is more suitable in some cases, and less suitable in others.  

So now I'd like to ask you the following 2 questions:
1) do you think that objects can 'grow'?
2) can developers grow? and how does that answer correspond to your answer to the first question?