One thing that you'll see popping up frequently as you're learning Ruby is the word 'metaprogramming'.  But what exactly does it mean? Simply put: metaprogramming code is code that dynamically enhances/modifies the behavior of your classes and even single objects.  There are a lot of very cool things you can do in Ruby thanks to metaprogramming and it's probably one of the biggest reasons why a framework like Rails is able to deliver such tremendous productivity gains.  Which means it's definitely a topic worth learning about, which is why i picked up <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Metaprogramming-Ruby-Program-Like-Pros/dp/1934356476/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1283975648&sr=8-1">Paolo Perrotta's Metaprogramming Ruby</a> book.

As you can imagine, some of the concepts that you'll have to learn about to apply metaprogramming techniques effectively are somewhat advanced (or at least, they <em>appear</em> to be at first).  Paolo does an extraordinary job of explaining all of this in a very easy to grasp manner.  The writing style is clear and very easy to follow.  There are some parts that you might need to read twice (or thrice) before you get it, but that's more due to your mental conditioning from static languages than it is because of Paolo's writing.

The book is divided in 2 parts (well, 3 if you count the appendices).  In the first part, you'll learn everything there is to know about metaprogramming.  You're going to learn all about how objects and classes (which are really just objects) work in Ruby, and you'll explore a variety of ways of changing or extending existing classes and objects.  You'll get a full grasp on Ruby's object model and you'll see how you can use that knowledge to your advantage.  

In the second part, you'll see how metaprogramming is used in various Rails libraries.  But don't worry, you don't need to know Rails to get value out of this part.  It just shows a lot of real-world examples of the tricks and techniques you learned in the first part of the book and it very well might fill your head with ideas of stuff that you want to do as well (i know it did for me).  You'll also find some good advice on how to apply metaprogramming safely.  There's a lot of power in metaprogramming, and you're going to feel the pain if you go overboard with it.  Follow some of Paolo's advice and you might avoid or at least minimize that pain :)

The second part closes with a redefinition of the metaprogramming concept.  Paolo does a good job of making clear that metaprogramming really is just, well, programming.  It's different from 'regular' programming, but it's still just programming.  It's the kind of programming that truly leads to less repetitive programming. 

If i had to describe this book in one word, i'd go with 'fascinating'.  It's eye-opening, highly informative and fun to read. It'll inspire you to change the way you write your code and the perspective you'll gain on OO topics that you already thought you knew well is just invaluable.