<p>As i’m sure most of you have noticed, Ayende recently started an <a href="http://ayende.com/Blog/archive/2010/02/27/nhibernate-donation-campaign.aspx" target="_blank">NHibernate Donation Campaign</a>.&#160; I was <a href="http://groups.google.com/group/nhibernate-development/browse_thread/thread/7cf59efa31c46119" target="_blank">against</a> the idea from the beginning and even though this post will probably piss off a few people (like i ever cared about that, right?), i wanted to share a few of my thoughts on this with you.</p>  <p>The idea of sponsoring an open source project and helping out financially is definitely nice, but there are some very important practical issues that need to be kept in mind.&#160; Those practical issues are IMO being ignored by this campaign (which honestly feels like a publicity stunt more than anything else) … some of them were mentioned in the original mailinglist discussion but no resolution has been offered.&#160; There are probably more issues that we haven’t even thought of yet, but the most important ones are (again, IMO):</p>  <ul>   <li>Who’s going to decide how much of the money will go to the committers, and what will that be based on?&#160; Will it be based on past contributions? Future contributions? The complexity of the contributions? Total number of contributions? Total time spent on the project?&#160; We can’t even measure some of these things, so this is bound to either raise some discussions sooner or later, or might even upset some people.&#160; I can certainly imagine that some contributors from the past (like, the ones who did most of the really hard work in the beginning) could feel that they’re entitled to some (or most) of the money.&#160;&#160; Discussing how to spend the money on committers is just going to open a can of worms that could possibly cause much more problems between committers than it would solve.&#160; </li>    <li>There has to be some legal entity (or at least a person) who’s in charge of the bank account where the money will be deposited.&#160; At this point, we have no formal structure or organization to deal with something like that.&#160; I’m no expert on legal matters at all, but i can’t help but think that this isn’t something you can just decide on in a mailinglist… Some level of formalization is most likely required here.</li>    <li>Taxes… if the money goes to committers, then they will have to pay taxes on it based on the laws of the country they’re living in.&#160; Tax laws obviously vary from country to country, but i don’t think it’s unrealistic to claim that between 25% and 50% of the money will simply go to the government(s) instead of actually benefitting the project.&#160; You might wanna keep this in mind before you donate…</li> </ul>  <p>These are just 3 big issues that could come of this, and i don’t really see a true benefit to the whole thing.&#160; The people who in the past have spent time on NHibernate either volunteered to do so, or were paid by someone (or some company) to spend a certain amount of time on it.&#160; Without donations, it will just go on like that and i don’t really think there’s anything wrong with that.&#160;&#160; While resources are certainly limited, this approach probably causes <em>less</em> problems than one that distributes donations amongst committers.</p>  <p>Now, just to be absolutely clear on this… i am one of the NHibernate committers, and i don’t feel that i’m entitled to any of the money that will be raised.&#160; For one, i haven’t committed anything in the past 6 months, and the things i did commit definitely aren’t worthy of a donation.&#160; If we are going to accept donations and spend it on people instead of infrastructure, i believe any money that would be raised should go to the people who originally started NHibernate and worked hard to get it to a state where it actually became usable in the .NET world.&#160; If it weren’t for their efforts, it never would’ve been in a position to become the de facto ORM in the .NET world, regardless of who’s working on it right now. </p>