I don't own a business (yet), but I was very interested in reading <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Rework-Jason-Fried/dp/0307463745/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1287237671&sr=8-1">this book</a> from 2 people who managed to achieve huge results with a very small company.  In this book, Jason Fried and David Heinemeier Hansson (aka DHH) share their insightful opinions on a variety of topics related to starting and running a successful business.  Considering the fact that this is mostly a technical blog, the question that you're probably asking yourself right now is: is this book only useful to (aspiring) entrepreneurs, or is it useful for those of us who're perfectly happy with just being employees of a company?  I'll get back to that later on.

The book consists of 10 chapters, each of which deals with a coarse-grained topic like progress, productivity, competitors, hiring, evolution, culture, etc.  Each chapter consists of a set of 'posts' (think 'blog posts') about the topic at hand.  Most of them are pretty short, yet they all contain <em>a lot</em> of wisdom.  You might be very surprised by some of the advice they offer, or you might find yourself nodding in agreement from time to time.  Or even often, depending from person to person obviously.  They don't have all the answers, and in some cases they will tell you to avoid certain things while not telling you how you should do it instead.  But as they make clear in the beginning: it's actually a good thing to just go with the flow, see how things play out and deal with problems as they present themselves, and not before that.  Read their advice, stick to it, and you just might be able to prevent the otherwise inevitable slope to mediocrity that looms for pretty much every other company which sticks to mostly conventional ways of doing things.

So, is this book useful for you? If you're an entrepreneurial type, and you still don't know the answer to this question, then you really shouldn't be running your own business.  I'd also recommend this book to anyone who is working as an employee for the following two reasons: it'll either improve the way you do parts of <em>your</em> job depending on what your responsibilities are, or you'll figure out whether or not your current employers are worth working for in the long term :).  That's a win-win situation if you ask me.  The only people who won't really get any value out of this are people who are already 'institutionalized'... those who have been working in big companies for a while now and wouldn't be able to adapt to life without them.  

I can imagine that quite a few people who read this review will still be skeptical (hi Ben!).  That is of course your prerogative but keep in mind that these guys do have a proven track record that few can match.  Read the book, and you'll understand why.  If you're still skeptical after reading the book, go out and prove them wrong. These guys would love it if you did.