Note: This post is part of a series. You can find the introduction and overview of the series <a href="http://davybrion.com/blog/2010/08/mvp-in-silverlightwpf-series">here</a>.

We've (finally) reached the end of this series.  As i mentioned before, this series was a response to a lot of the criticism that i received for my own critique on MVVM.  Obviously, if you're going to dish it out, you have to be able to take it as well.  And i did.  I honestly can't even care about criticism on my work as long as i believe in what i do.  But what did tick me off a lot by those reactions was the lack of willingness to at least try and think about what i was saying.  A lot of people (particularly in the .NET world) are completely unwilling to invest just a little bit of time and effort in reading something and trying to understand it.  They just want to glance over a post until they see a little bit of code and they'll often base their opinions solely on that.  Unfortunately for them, they usually miss the appropriate context due to their laziness and they either won't get it, or won't understand the difference with what they already think they know.

People wanted code, so i showed them code.  I also provided all the context in the world to go along with that code, and i can only hope that people took (or will take) the time to let it all soak in.  If, after that, they still disagree with what i'm saying, then at least their opinion will be based on something more than just a quick glance over a post.  

Other than that, i don't really have a lot more to say about the whole thing.  If you're not convinced by the merits of the approach i've shown by now, nothing i can say in this post will change your mind about it either.  And again, there's absolutely nothing wrong with disagreeing with this, as long as you show willingness to learn and put in some effort.  That's all i can ask for.