As soon as i had a shot at using IronRuby at work, i searched for some books that thoroughly covered IronRuby since the documentation of IronRuby is, unfortunately, rather lacking.  I only found 3 titles: <a href="http://www.amazon.com/IronRuby-Unleashed-Shay-Friedman/dp/0672330784/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1286026218&sr=8-2">IronRuby Unleashed</a>, <a href="http://www.amazon.com/IronRuby-Action-Ivan-Porto-Carrero/dp/1933988614/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1286026427&sr=8-2">IronRuby In Action</a>, and <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Professional-IronRuby-Aaron-Junod/dp/0470377089/ref=sr_1_5?ie=UTF8&qid=1286026427&sr=8-5">Professional IronRuby</a>.  Seeing as how IronRuby Unleashed is the only one that is actually available (Professional IronRuby's page on amazon shows a release date of June 2009 but it can't be ordered nor can i find a reference to the book on the publisher's website and IronRuby In Action isn't out yet), i ordered it right away.

This book covers a lot of ground.  It starts off with a short introduction to the Dynamic Language Runtime and IronRuby and follows that up with some basic coverage of the Ruby language.  If you already know Ruby, you can obviously skip this part since there won't be anything new for you here.  If you're not familiar with Ruby yet and just want to learn about Ruby and how to use it together with .NET, you'll definitely appreciate this part, though i would <a href="/blog/2010/08/highly-recommended-book-the-ruby-programming-language/">recommend picking up The Ruby Programming Language</a> to learn it more thoroughly.  

Things get more interesting after this part, with a chapter dedicated to the fundamentals of interoperability between .NET and Ruby, more specifically: how .NET types and concepts can be used from Ruby code.  The chapter after that takes a close look at how you can write Ruby classes that inherit from .NET classes.  The next couple of chapters focus mostly on writing Ruby code that takes advantage of some .NET specific technologies, like ADO.NET, Windows Forms, WPF, ASP.NET MVC (there's also a chapter on Ruby On Rails btw) and Silverlight.  Some of those chapters spend a little too much time explaining concepts that are related to the actual .NET technology that's being discussed instead of focusing more closely on writing Ruby code that takes advantage of those .NET pieces, but generally speaking they do a great job of covering many of the possibilities that you have with IronRuby.

You'll then learn about some of the options you have for writing automated tests in Ruby (either to test your .NET code, or to just test your Ruby code that runs on .NET).  This chapter also contains introductions to 2 of the frameworks that the .NET world continuously tries to emulate: RSpec and Cucumber.  After that, you (finally) get to the topic that interests me the most: using Ruby code from C#.  This is a topic that never gets enough attention IMO.  I wish you could find more information about this online, but it seems that few people who're using IronRuby are interested in consuming Ruby code from .NET instead of going the other way around (consuming .NET from Ruby).  Anyways, it's good that this book covers some of the essentials of doing this.  The book then concludes with a chapter on extending IronRuby with 'native' .NET extensions.  This is interesting as well, though it's important to realize when (and when not) to use this.

It's not the greatest book on programming you'll ever read, as some of the examples could've been better IMO, or more extensive.  Then again, it's the only available book on IronRuby at the moment, and it definitely covers a lot of stuff.  It's easy to follow, and you'll definitely get a good view on all of your options with regards to combining Ruby and .NET.  In short: if you're interested in combining Ruby with .NET, this book is definitely worth buying.