I happened to come across some blog posts and tweets that once again mentioned how evil it is to use comments in code.  Some people still like to advocate the "if you need comments, your code sucks!" sentiment.  As is often the case with this kind of statement, the only correct (or dare i say realistic) point of view is: it depends! 

I generally agree that you should strive to avoid comments in code.  That is, you should write your code in a way that doesn't require comments for the reader to easily understand and grasp what the code is doing.  However... there are situations where comments <em>are</em> helpful (or even required), since you simply can't write everything in such a manner that it doesn't require any comments.

To back up my point, i'd like to point you to <a href="/blog/2009/02/challenge-do-you-truly-understand-this-code/">this challenge</a> i posted over a year ago.  That code is clean.  But pretty much everyone could use some comments to understand why that certain approach was necessary since it's just not that obvious when focusing solely on the code.  That code applies a certain pattern which isn't well known, but there is a very specific reason why the pattern is needed.  And i still believe that most developers need comments to understand it properly.  That's not to say that the guy who wrote it (which happened to be me) is better than those who're going to have to maintain it.  Hell, i wrote the code, and i would certainly be glad to see some comments in that code if i had to make a change 6 months after the fact.  

The key thing to remember is this: don't blindly follow what the books and/or the 'legends' say.  If you need to write some code in a very non-obvious way, then you could really make things easier for those who need to maintain it (which could very well be you, btw) by including some comments to explain why a certain solution/pattern was chosen.  There are some details you simply can't show through good naming practices or clean code in general... some things simply need to be explained and it's quite possible that a WHY comment or two benefits not only you but whoever is going to read the code more than some kind of excessive and futile exercise in making it as easy to understand as possible without comments ever will be.

In short, strive to avoid the need to write comments by writing clean code.  But don't be afraid to use comments wisely either when clean code simply doesn't cut it.  There's nothing wrong with that.  After all, we don't all have the luxury to restrict our efforts to contrived examples.