As good as the <a href="http://docs.jquery.com/Main_Page">jQuery documentation</a> is, I generally prefer to pick up a good book whenever I want to learn something new.  And if you're new to jQuery, Manning's <a href="http://www.manning.com/bibeault2/">jQuery In Action</a> is pretty much the perfect one to pick up.  It (obviously) starts with the basics, moving further continuously while hardly ever showing too much new stuff at once.  You'll quickly become familiar with the basic principles that jQuery revolves around and the book then gradually builds upon that with each chapter.  

I'm not going to go over everything that's covered in the book (just check out the table of content <a href="http://www.manning.com/bibeault2/excerpt_contents.html">here</a>), but I can't imagine you'll have any questions left about jQuery after finishing this book. Everything is explained very clearly and thoroughly and the authors do an admirable job of avoiding boring parts.  The only times where it's (predictably) less interesting (though, I wouldn't call that boring) is when you're presented with lots of reference-like documentation.  In most cases, it's only a few pages but sometimes it's just a little bit too much.  That's pretty much the only bad thing that can be said about this book.

One thing that I would like to point out is that, in my opinion, previous experience with or knowledge of JavaScript isn't really a requisite before reading this book. The little JavaScript-specific knowledge that you need to be productive with jQuery (a testament to jQuery's elegance, clarity and overall quality) is covered in an appendix which will most likely be sufficient for most people, at least to those who're somewhat used to looking at other programming languages from time to time.  That's not to say that it's not worth learning more about JavaScript (some of the next books I'll read are specifically focused on JavaScript actually), I just don't think you need in-depth JavaScript knowledge to use jQuery effectively.