I published some NHibernate examples almost 4 years ago, and they still get downloaded pretty frequently.  Unfortunately they still use NHibernate 1.2 and are somewhat limited as to what they demonstrate.  <a href="http://thatextramile.be/training/nhibernate">My NHibernate course</a> is rather example/exercise-heavy so I thought it would be a good time to replace those outdated examples with new ones and make them available to anyone who wants them.  The examples are not complete yet, but will be updated frequently in the next couple of weeks.  After that, I intend to keep them up to date to demonstrate new NHibernate features as they are introduced with new releases.  Of course, you're more than welcome to contribute examples of your own.

The solution consists of a suite of automated tests that run on a SQLite database, which demonstrate some features of NHibernate. All tests currently run with the classic HBM mapping files and FluentNHibernate. Choosing which of the two is used can be done by selecting the correct build configuration (either HBMSQLITE or FLUENTSQLITE) before running the tests.  Running the tests doesn't require any software to be installed or any configuration to be performed by you. Though you can obviously run the tests on different databases if you want to.  The object model that is used is based on Northwind with a couple of changes.  The object model can evolve into whatever it needs to be to showcase NHibernate features/usage.  Some other models might also be introduced later on to show features that wouldn't fit well with the Northwind-based model.

These examples could be useful to people who are new to NHibernate, but could be interesting for experienced NHibernate users as well, if only as a playground to quickly experiment with some features that you're unsure of.

You can find the code <a href="https://github.com/davybrion/NHibernateWorkshop">here</a> or you can always download the latest version <a href="https://github.com/davybrion/NHibernateWorkshop/archives/master">here</a>. 