I'm not a religious or spiritual individual but there is one thing I strongly believe in: if you put out negativity, it will come back to you in one way or another.  Similarly, if you have a positive disposition you're more likely to benefit from other people responding positively towards you, though that's obviously never guaranteed. I know that when I walk around pissed off and filled with negativity, nothing good ever happens to me.  People stay away from you or don't want to deal with you at all when you give them that "leave me the fuck alone" vibe.  But on the other hand, when I feel good about myself or my life, good things just seem to happen.  It's at those moments when I meet interesting new people or when new opportunities seem to present themselves out of nowhere.  

If you keep that in mind, the question of "what exactly causes me to be negative?" becomes pretty important.  What's the source of my negativity? Are there multiple sources? Why am I keeping those sources of negativity in my life? Those are questions you ought to ask yourself regularly.  And you have to be prepared for the fact that the true answers could be hard for you to deal with.  In the past 2 years, I've seen a few of my closest friends deal with situations where they got out of serious long-term relationships or seemingly fantastic jobs because those situations were hurting them in a way that could no longer be ignored.  And in each case, it was a tough decision but it was made nonetheless and I'm very glad to say that none of them regret the decisions that were made.  In fact, they're all better off nowadays. 

In my case, it was my previous job.  I had been there for 8 years and those years consisted of some great times, and some that were pretty bad.  Regardless, I had a strong belief in the company and its future and was truly convinced that it was the best place for me to be.  But this summer, I guess I started looking at things differently.  I just couldn't believe in the future of the company anymore.  I was still working on very interesting stuff, but the attraction of that goes away quickly once you realize that whatever cool stuff you're working on will only be used by a handful of people, if that even.  Combine that with some seriously conflicting viewpoints on how your career could evolve and I'm sure you can see how that became a huge source of negativity in my life. 

And as with any source of negativity, it ends up influencing your life more than you can imagine.  I wouldn't go as far as to say that I was depressed, but it did turn me into a bitter and angry individual.  So I thought about it for a few weeks, and decided that the best thing for me would be to just get out of there, which isn't as easy as some of you might expect it to be.  After 8 years, you kinda have the feeling that you've invested a lot of yourself into it and there are a couple of people who you consider to be more than just 'coworkers'. Nevertheless, the whole situation was making me miserable, which influences a lot more than just those 8 hours a day when you're at work.  I didn't just feel bad at work, I felt bad outside of work as well.  <em>Because</em> of how bad the whole situation at work made me feel in general. 

Fast forward a few months, and things are looking a lot different.  I left my job, went independent, found a great gig and it's having a very positive impact on my life for more than just those 8 hours a day.  I don't walk around being frustrated and pissed off anymore, and good things are happening to me because of that.  If there's one piece of advice of mine that I'd really like you to follow and to remember, then it is the one that I wanted to share with this post: walk out on the sources of negativity in your life, no matter how hard you think it may be because in the end, it will make you <em>a lot</em> happier than you used to be. That doesn't mean that you have to walk around like a happy hippie all the time because it's only human to feel some negativity once in a while.  Just don't let it dominate, that's all.  And once you realize it does start to dominate, walk out on the cause of it so it can't manifest into something worse.