A very large group of developers still thinks of JavaScript as a joke. I used to be one of them, as you might have been, or perhaps still are. They have such negative views on JavaScript: about how horrible it is in general, that it is slow, that it's just a toy language, that it's not even object oriented (which shows you how little they know of it).  But the reality of the matter is that JavaScript is increasingly being used for more and more serious things.  You can do wonderful and truly powerful stuff with it to enrich your users' client-side experience of your web applications.  It's also becoming increasingly popular on the server-side with frameworks like node.js, known for its high performance and throughput, not exactly attributes you'd expect to be linked to a framework written in a supposedly slow language.  And even Microsoft appears to be promoting JavaScript ever increasingly with their renewed focus on IE and <a href="http://arstechnica.com/microsoft/news/2011/06/microsoft-gives-the-first-official-look-of-windows-8-touch-interface.ars">now even as one of the preferred ways of developing applications for Windows 8's new UI</a>.

To those of you who dislike JavaScript: it's not going to go anywhere and in fact, it seems like it's only going to get bigger and bigger over the next couple of years since it appears to be one of the few languages that practically every major player in the industry can benefit from in a variety of ways. All browser vendors are continuously improving the performance of their JavaScript engines.  Plenty of projects/startups/companies have shown that JavaScript can indeed be the right tool for many different jobs.  Simply put: there's a lot of innovation going around in the JavaScript community and there's no reason to believe it'll slow down anytime soon.

My advice: start taking it seriously.  Try to actually learn the language and experiment with it.  I can definitely recommend reading <a href="http://www.amazon.com/JavaScript-Good-Parts-Douglas-Crockford/dp/0596517742">JavaScript: The Good Parts</a> and <a href="http://www.amazon.com/JavaScript-Patterns-Stoyan-Stefanov/dp/0596806752/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1307028187&sr=8-1">JavaScript Patterns</a>.  There are indeed plenty of bad parts in JavaScript, but if you stick to the good parts and learn and understand the patterns that enable you to use it very effectively, you might end up pretty surprised at how nice it can be.  Even if you don't appreciate how nice it is, you'll at least have learned a language that is becoming increasingly relevant which means you have one more skill that will be usable in many different situations, and probably for a long time to come.