There's been a lot of arguing about the differences between the .NET developer community and the Ruby community lately. It started because of a developer who moved to Ruby and then wrote about how great that community is compared to the .NET community. I'm not going to link to the original post or any of the reactions to it. I'm also not going to name names because some ego's don't need to be inflated more than they already are, and the people involved will probably feel stupid enough already a year from now about some of the things that were said. And to be clear: that goes for people on both sides.

The original post was a rather silly rant where the author vented his frustration with the community he had previously been a part of. And yes, some of you are currently thinking "umm Davy, didn't you do the exact same thing last year?". I sure did, and I know now how stupid it was (personal growth for the win, amirite?). I too was very frustrated with the state of the .NET community, found something that I thought was better and took a few shots at the .NET community, like some other people who've moved to a different community.

The thing is though: why even bother? Sure, sometimes the urge to tell someone (or a group of people) off is hard to resist. But doing so rarely benefits you, and when it does, it's most likely when it's targeted to one person who might need to be confronted with something. If you tell off a group of people, what good can you possibly expect to come out of it? You can't expect them to suddenly agree with your point of view, even if some of them might do so. The majority of them will just think you're a dick and will be even less inclined to listen to what you have to say in the future. So what exactly did you accomplish? Apart from getting a bunch of people to think less of you, there is absolutely nothing to get out of it. Also, if you plan on becoming a vocal member of your new community, you might want to keep in mind that some of the people in that new community will take notice of your childish rant and some of them will expect you to do the same thing to them once you're ready to move to yet another community a few years down the line. You won't just look like a dick, you're also setting yourself up for negative future expectations that some people will have of you. Really, why even bother writing such posts? If you need to vent, at least try to do it in a constructive manner and in a respectful tone instead of acting like a spurned lover or a kid that didn't get his way.

As for the people who reacted defensively to it, again I ask: why even bother? Why get all worked up about something that was written by someone who doesn't even want to be a part of your community anymore? Why even get angry or frustrated about someone making a blanket statement that wasn't even directed at you personally? Why would you extend the attention that it's going to get by going on and on about it on Twitter? That too, is off-putting and a waste of time and energy. Not just yours, but everyone else's who has to filter through the noise. And what exactly are you arguing about? You're arguing about something that is inherently subjective. Do you get into heated arguments about music or movies as well?  You're getting all worked up about other people's preferences, which doesn't really improve your life or situation in any way at all. On the contrary, your whining about it might just result in people not wanting to listen to you anymore either. I unfollowed a couple of people on Twitter because I didn't see the point in reading the same bitching in my timeline for a couple of days in a row. If you really need to get it off your chest, write a coherent post about it, publish it and make your statement <em>once</em> and then move on to something more interesting, like, having fun building working software.

Different strokes for different folks, people. Focus on the things you find interesting and have fun with it. Enjoy building things and try to improve by learning whatever you think will make you a better developer. Consider sharing what you learn with others if you have time for it. But please, let's quit bitching about other development communities because there really is nothing good that can come out of it.