I recently referred to an interesting .NET job as a 'non-typical .NET job'. I hadn't used that term yet up until that point, so I thought that was rather interesting. But what exactly do I mean with 'non-typical .NET job'? It's pretty simple really: a job where you're using .NET technology without blindly following the guidelines, recommendations and software from Microsoft on how to develop software on the .NET platform. It basically means that you'll use *whatever* you think is most appropriate for what you're trying to do. 

The biggest problem in the .NET world is that most companies that do .NET development just stick to what Microsoft tells them to use and how to use it. Many .NET developers largely focus on that, because they know all too well that it increases their odds of getting hired. And let's face it: Microsoft has a solution for practically everything. The only problem is that those solutions are rarely the best in what they're trying to solve. But hey, no manager gets fired for going with Microsoft, right? 

The result is that there are too many companies and too many developers that focus only on what Microsoft offers. But there's a lot more to software development than what Microsoft offers, or even knows about. There are countless examples of Microsoft being late to whatever technical party is interesting at the time. And when they show up, they certainly don't always make a good impression.

If you're the kind of developer that likes to learn from what other software development communities are doing, odds are high that you're screwed. There is an interesting OSS community within the .NET world, and they frequently produce great solutions, quite often based on succes stories coming from other development communities. The problem is not that .NET developers don't have great solutions available to them. The problem is that the majority of them simply don't know about them only because there hasn't been any Microsoft hype about it, or that the devs who do know about it aren't allowed to use it because their managers are sceptical about it, most likely also because there's no Microsoft backing for the technology or architectural style that is being proposed.

I'm not advocating the avoidance of Microsoft products or solutions. By all means, use Microsoft products if they are indeed the best solution to your problem. But do be aware of the things that are getting attention outside of the Microsoft sphere and use them when it makes more sense to use them. That's the essence of the 'non-typical .NET job' and that's exactly what makes it interesting: using the right tool for the right job.